#Intro to Nock

> What one fool can do, another can.  
> - Ancient Simian proverb

Now that we've installed Arvo, let's learn Nock.

Think of Nock as a kind of functional assembly language.  It's
not like assembly language in that it's directly executed by the
hardware.  It is like assembly language in that (a) everything in
Urbit executes as Nock; (b) you wouldn't want to program directly
in Nock; and (c) learning to program directly in Nock is a great
way to start understanding Urbit from the ground up.

Just as Unix runs C programs by compiling them to assembler,
Urbit runs Hoon programs by compiling them to Nock.  You could
try to learn Hoon without learning Nock.  But just as C is a thin
wrapper over the physical CPU, Hoon is a thin wrapper over
the Nock virtual machine.  It's a tall stack made of thin layers,
which is much easier to learn a layer at a time.

And unlike most fundamental theories of computing, there's really
nothing smart or interesting about Nock.  Of course, in a
strictly formal sense, all of computing is math.  But that
doesn't mean it needs to feel like math.  Nock is a simple
mechanical device and it's meant to feel that way.

##Specification

Let's start with the Nock spec.  It may look slightly
intimidating, but at least it isn't long.

No, you can't just look at this and tell what it's doing.
But at least there are only 39 lines of it.

    1  ::    A noun is an atom or a cell.
    2  ::    An atom is a natural number.
    3  ::    A cell is an ordered pair of nouns.
    4  ::
    5  ::    nock(a)          *a
    6  ::    [a b c]          [a [b c]]
    7  ::
    8  ::    ?[a b]           0
    9  ::    ?a               1
    10 ::    +[a b]           +[a b]
    11 ::    +a               1 + a
    12 ::    =[a a]           0
    13 ::    =[a b]           1
    14 ::    =a               =a
    15 ::
    16 ::    /[1 a]           a
    17 ::    /[2 a b]         a
    18 ::    /[3 a b]         b
    19 ::    /[(a + a) b]     /[2 /[a b]]
    20 ::    /[(a + a + 1) b] /[3 /[a b]]
    21 ::    /a               /a
    22 ::
    23 ::    *[a [b c] d]     [*[a b c] *[a d]]
    24 ::
    25 ::    *[a 0 b]         /[b a]
    26 ::    *[a 1 b]         b
    27 ::    *[a 2 b c]       *[*[a b] *[a c]]
    28 ::    *[a 3 b]         ?*[a b]
    29 ::    *[a 4 b]         +*[a b]
    30 ::    *[a 5 b]         =*[a b]
    31 ::
    32 ::    *[a 6 b c d]     *[a 2 [0 1] 2 [1 c d] [1 0] 2 [1 2 3] [1 0] 4 4 b]
    33 ::    *[a 7 b c]       *[a 2 b 1 c]
    34 ::    *[a 8 b c]       *[a 7 [[7 [0 1] b] 0 1] c]
    35 ::    *[a 9 b c]       *[a 7 c 2 [0 1] 0 b]
    36 ::    *[a 10 [b c] d]  *[a 8 c 7 [0 3] d]
    37 ::    *[a 10 b c]      *[a c]
    38 ::
    39 ::    *a               *a

Bear in mind: this is pseudocode.  It is neither Nock nor Hoon.
Strictly speaking, it's really just English.  All formal systems
resolve to informal language at the very bottom.  What's
important is just that no two reasonable people can read the spec
to mean two different things.

##Sounds##

In characteristic Urbit style, we got tired of three or
four-syllable pronunciations of ASCII punctuation characters and
assigned them all standard one-syllable names.  We'll meet the
rest later, but the ones we use in Nock:

    `$`   buc
    `/`   fas
    `+`   lus
    `(`   pel
    `)`   per
    `[`   sel
    `]`   ser
    `*`   tar
    `=`   tis
    `?`   wut

##Nouns##

Let's look at the data model first - lines 1-3 above.  Ideally,
you *can* look at this and just tell what it's doing.  But let's
explain it a little anyway.

An atom is a natural number - ie, an unsigned integer.  Nock does
not limit the size of atoms, or know what an atom means.

For instance, the atom 97 might mean the number 97, or it might
mean the letter 'a' (ASCII 97).  A very large atom might be the
number of grains of sand on the beach - or it might be a GIF of
your children playing on the beach.  Typically when we represent
strings or files as atoms, the first byte is the low byte.  But
even this is just a convention.  An atom is an atom.

A cell is an ordered pair of any two nouns - cell or atom.  We
group cells with square brackets:

    [1 1]
    [34 45]
    [[3 42] 12]
    [[1 0] [0 [1 99]]]

To keep our keyboards from wearing out, line 6 tells us that
brackets group to the right:

    6  ::    [a b c]           [a [b c]]

So instead of writing

    [2 3]
    [2 [6 7]]
    [2 [6 [14 15]]]
    [2 [6 [[28 29] [30 31]]]]
    [2 [6 [[28 29] [30 [62 63]]]]]

we can write

    [2 3]
    [2 6 7]
    [2 6 14 15]
    [2 6 [28 29] 30 31]
    [2 6 [28 29] 30 62 63]

While this notational convenience is hardly rocket science, it's
surprising how confusing it can be, especially if you have a Lisp
background.  Lisp's "S-expressions" are very similar to nouns,
except that Lisp has multiple types of atom, and Lisp's syntax
automatically adds list terminators to groups.  So in Lisp

    '(2 6 7)

is a shorthand for

    '(2 6 7 . nil)

and the equivalent noun is

    [2 6 7 0]

or, of course,

    [2 [6 [7 0]]]

##Rules##

A Nock program is given meaning by a process of reduction.  To compute
`Nock(x)`, where `x` is any noun, we step through the rules from
the top down, find the first left-hand side that matches `x`, and
reduce it to the right-hand side.


Right away we see line 5:

    5  ::    Nock(a)           *a

When we use variable names, like `a`, in the pseudocode spec, we
simply mean that the rule fits for any noun `a`.

So `Nock(x)` is `*x`, for any noun `x`.  And how do we reduce
`*x`?  Looking up, we see that lines 23 through 39 reduce `*x` -
for different patterns of `x`.

For example, suppose our `x` is `[5 1 6]`.  Stepping downward
through the rules, the first one that matches is line 26:

    26 ::    *[a 1 b]        b

Line 26 tells us that when reducing any noun of the form `[a 1
b]`, the result is just `b`.  So `*[5 1 6]` is `6`.

For a more complicated example, try

    *[[19 42] [0 3] 0 2]

The first rule it matches is line 23:

    23 ::    *[a [b c] d]     [*[a b c] *[a d]]

since `a` is `[19 42]`, `b` is `0`, `c` is `3`, and `d` is `[0 2]`.
So this reduces to a new computation

    [*[[19 42] 0 3] *[[19 42] 0 2]]

Each side of this matches rule 25:

    25 ::    *[a 0 b]         /[b a]

So we have

    [/[3 [19 42]] /[2 [19 42]]]

When we explain `/`, we'll see that this is `[42 19]`.

Finally, suppose our `x` is just `42`.  The first rule that
matches is the last:

    39 ::    *a               *a

So `*42` is `*42`, which is `*42`.  Logically, Nock goes into
an infinite reduction loop and never terminates.

In practice, this is just a clever CS way to specify the simple
reality that `*42` is an error and makes no sense.  An actual
interpreter will not spin forever - it will throw an exception
outside the computation.

##Functions##

We've already seen the `*` function (pronounced "tar"), which
just means `Nock`.  This is the main show and we'll work through
it soon, but first let's explain the functions it uses - `=`, `?`,
`+` and `/`.

###Equals: `=`###

`=` (pronounced "tis", or sometimes "is") tests a cell for
equality.  `0` means yes, `1` means no:

    12 ::    =[a a]           0
    13 ::    =[a b]           1
    14 ::    =a               =a

Again, testing an atom for equality makes no sense and logically
fails to terminate.

###Depth: `?`###

`?` (pronounced "wut") tests whether is a noun is a cell.  Again,
`0` means yes, `1` means no:

    8  ::    ?[a b]           0
    9  ::    ?a               1

(This convention is the opposite of old-fashioned booleans, so we
try hard to say "yes" and "no" instead of "true" and "false.")

###Increment: `+`###

`+` (pronounced "lus", or sometimes "plus") adds 1 to an atom:

    10 ::    +[a b]           +[a b]
    11 ::    +a               1 + a

Because `+` works only for atoms, whereas `=` works only for
cells, the error rule matches first for `+` and last for `=`.

###Address: `/`###

`/` (pronounced "fas") is a tree address function:

    16 ::    /[1 a]           a
    17 ::    /[2 a b]         a
    18 ::    /[3 a b]         b
    19 ::    /[(a + a) b]     /[2 /[a b]]
    20 ::    /[(a + a + 1) b] /[3 /[a b]]
    21 ::    /a               /a

This looks way more complicated than it is.  Essentially, we define a
noun as a binary tree - where each node branches to a left and right
child - and assign an address, or *axis*, to every element in the
tree.  The root of the tree is `/1`.  The left child of
every node at `/a` is `/2a`; the right child is `/2a+1`.  (Writing `(a
+ a)` is just a clever way to write `2*a`, while minimizing the set of
pseudocode forms.)

For a complete tree of depth 3, the axis address space looks
like this:

             1
        2          3
     4    5     6     7
    8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Let's use the example `[[97 2] [1 42 0]]`.  So

    /[1 [97 2] [1 42 0]]      [[97 2] [1 42 0]]

because `/1` is the root of the tree, ie, the whole noun.  Then
its left child is `/2` (ie, `(1 + 1)`):

    /[2 [97 2] [1 42 0]]      [97 2]

And its right child is `/3` (ie, `(1 + 1 + 1)`):

    /[3 [97 2] [1 42 0]]      [1 42 0]

And delving into `/3`, we see `/(3 + 3)` and `(3 + 3 + 1)`:

    /[6 [97 2] [1 42 0]]      1
    /[7 [97 2] [1 42 0]]      [42 0]

If this seems like rocket science, the problem may be that you're
too smart to understand Nock.  Forget everything you learned in
school and start over from line 1.

It's also fun to build nouns in which every atom is its own axis:

    1
    [2 3]
    [2 6 7]
    [[4 5] 6 7]
    [[4 5] 6 14 15]
    [[4 5] [12 13] 14 15]
    [[4 [10 11]] [12 13] 14 15]
    [[[8 9] [10 11]] [12 13] 14 30 31]

Once you've spent enough time programming in Urbit, you'll know
these axes in your dreams.  No - really. 

