#Basic Arvo

These sections assume you've gotten Arvo up and running; if 
not, [do so](/setup) first.

#Path Magic

What do we know?  Okay, so this is an OS.  It's a little like
Unix but different.  It can print expressions and run commands.
Commands start with a colon.  Let's try the simplest command:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :ls
    ! type-fail
    ! exit

Hey, that didn't work!  It didn't work for two reasons.  One,
Arvo command-line arguments are typed, and `:ls` expects a path.
Two, `:ls` needs that path - unlike in Unix, applications can't
see the current path or shell variables.  (This is because Arvo
doesn't have 57 different ways of configuring an app.)  So try

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :ls /~waclux-tomwyc/try=
    con bin lib doc

This seems somewhat cumbersome - isn't there a way to refer to
the current path?  There is, though it doesn't look like Unix.

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :ls %
    con bin lib doc

Let's look at these paths in a little more detail.  An Arvo path
is more or less the same thing as a Unix path, except that Unix
isn't a global revision-control store.  It has the general form

    /ship/desk/case/spur

where `ship` is your ship, `desk` is a project (repository,
branch, etc), `case` is a revision of that project (a change
number, a date or a label), and `spur` is a path within it.

As in Unix, the shell (`batz`) keeps a current path.  As in 
Unix, you can write paths in an absolute or relative syntax,
and as in Unix `/` is the path separator.  Everything else
is completely different.

Let's use the REPL to print out some paths.  First, here's
the current path or something like it:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> /~waclux-tomwyc/try/~2013.9.1
    ['~waclux-tomwyc' %try '~2013.9.1' ~]

For complicated reasons related to the Hoon type system - which, 
for a higher-order functional type inference engine, is as stupid
as we could make it - this noun gets rendered as a tuple rather
than a path.  We can rectify this with a cast:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> `path`/~waclux-tomwyc/try/~2013.9.1
    /~waclux-tomwyc/try/~2013.9.1

It's the same value, just printed differently.  Except for the
date, this is the same as your current path:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> `path`%
    /~waclux-tomwyc/try/~2013.9.1..17.49.18..282e

The current date, of course, is always changing:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> `path`%
    /~waclux-tomwyc/try/~2013.9.1..17.50.39..7e38

Just to remind ourselves that these are Hoon expressions:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> `path`/(scot %p ->-<)/try/(scot %da (add ~d7 -<-))    /~waclux-tomwyc/try/~2013.9.8..17.55.03..b2ae

That's you next week.  It's black magic, don't worry about it.
Let's get back to relative paths.

A relative path is a function of the current path.  First, let's
make the current path interesting by moving to something deeper:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cd /=main=/foo/bar/baz/bam
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> 

Hey, wait, we actually used a relative path here.  The simplest
kind of relative path matches the current path by replacing a
path component with `=`.  So we could just as well have said

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> -<+
    '~2013.9.1..21.38.34..7a08'
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> :cd /~waclux-tomwyc/main/[-<+]/foo/bar/baz/bam

Why is `-<+` the current date as text?  Look, we're trying to
learn Arvo without too much Hoon here.  Just accept that it is.
In this context, anyway.  Notice also that the prompt uses a
relative path when (as is usually the case) the current case 
is just the present time, so that we don't have to stare at

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..21.38.34..7a08/foo/bar/baz/bam>

In any case, we can now use `=` to our heart's content.  Notice
that you don't need `/` to separate content from `=`.  `==` is
perfectly fine, too.

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`/=
    /~waclux-tomwyc
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`/==
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`/===
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..21.46.46..b250
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`/===zebra==
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..21.47.45..9ec8/zebra/bar/baz

I guess you could do this on Unix.  With awk or something.  It's
apparently been some time since the Nixon administration - how
about a new OS?  Anyway, there's another way to edit paths - with
`%`, which we've seen before, from the end -

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`%
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..21.53.17..07f6/foo/bar/baz/bam
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`%/frampton/comes/alive
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..21.55.53..8c5f/foo/bar/baz/bam/frampton/comes/alive

Unix can back up with `..`.  We do the same with multiple `%`:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`%%
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..22.22.51..34a1/foo/bar/baz
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`%%%
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..22.22.53..a332/foo/bar
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`%%%%
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..22.22.55..4909/foo
    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`%%%%/frampton/comes/alive
    /~waclux-tomwyc/main/~2013.9.1..22.23.02..9b05/foo/frampton/comes/alive

Finally, we can use `%` as a separator and edit both prefix and
suffix.  In this case, `=` is assumed up to the endpoint edit:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> `path`/=zebra%%%%/frampton/comes/alive
    /~waclux-tomwyc/zebra/~2013.9.1..22.26.39..e76d/foo/frampton/comes/alive

Thus concludes our edition of Path School.  Let's go back to the
default desk (`try`, meant for experiments only):

    ~waclux-tomwyc/main=/foo/bar/baz/bam> :cd /=try=
    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> 

