---
layout: tutpage
axis: doc-arvo
categories: tut
sort: 1
title: II - More Basic Arvo
---
#Local revision control

Now you're ready to see the full power of this fully armed
and operational revision-controlled filesystem.

Of course, you can build a revision-control system on top of
Unix.  And many have.  That doesn't make Unix a revision-control
system, though.  VMS had something of the sort.  (Some of us are
so old we actually used VMS.)  But VMS had... other issues...

Again, an Arvo path starts with `/ship/desk/case`.  The case,
ie version, applies to the whole desk, ie, project.  When we
edited `/=try=/bin/goodbye/hoon/`, our change created case
`2` of `/~waclux-tomwyc/try`.

All paths are immutable and referentially transparent.  Once
we've made our change, both cases of `/~waclux-tomwyc/try` exist
(logically; they're not actually copied, of course):

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cat /=try/1/bin/goodbye/hoon
    |=  *
    |=  [planet=tape ~]
    :_  ~  :_  ~
    [%$ !>("hello, {planet}.")]

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cat /=try/2/bin/goodbye/hoon
    |=  *
    |=  [planet=tape ~]
    :_  ~  :_  ~
    [%$ !>("goodbye, {planet}.")]

Time also works as you'd expect.  Remember, `=` as the case means
"at the current time":

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cat /=try=/bin/goodbye/hoon
    |=  *
    |=  [planet=tape ~]
    :_  ~  :_  ~
    [%$ !>("goodbye, {planet}.")]

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cat /=try/(scot %da (sub -<- ~m1))/bin/goodbye/hoon
    |=  *
    |=  [planet=tape ~]
    :_  ~  :_  ~
    [%$ !>("hello, {planet}.")]

Ie, now it's goodbye and a minute ago it was hello.  This is
anything but fancy.  Finally, let's label it:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :label %try %zebra
    = new /~waclux-tomwyc/try/3

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cat /=try/zebra/bin/goodbye/hoon
    |=  *
    |=  [planet=tape ~]
    :_  ~  :_  ~
    [%$ !>("goodbye, {planet}.")]

Note that adding a label is part of the delta stream and creates
a new change number, `3`.

What's more, these revisions don't just apply in `:cat`.  Of
course, this is a program and it exists to be run.  Normally when
we say

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :goodbye "world"
    "goodbye, world."

this actually does a path search and ends up as a shorthand for

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try=/bin/goodbye "world"
    "goodbye, world."

But of course, we can use the full revision notation here:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try/1/bin/goodbye "world"
    "hello, world."
    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try/2/bin/goodbye "world"
    "goodbye, world."
    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try/new/bin/goodbye "world"
    "goodbye, world."

Yeah, I guess that's kind of cool.  But... actually...

Arvo is anything but a fancy revision control system - partly
because it's a very young one, partly because it's cool to be
crude.  However, making revision control part of the OS, not on
top of the OS, opens up... certain... possibilities.

What happens if we try to use a revision that doesn't exist yet?
Remember that the `new` label was change `3`.  But suppose we try

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try/4/bin/goodbye "world"
    [waiting...]

Hm?  Again, either quit with ^D, or use another window; edit 
`$URBIT_HOME/waclux-tomwyc/try/bin/goodbye.hoon`.  Change
"goodbye" to "hasta la vista."  Then, `bin/vere mypier` if
you quit, or just hit space to trigger the sync.

    vere: urbit home is /Users/cyarvin/Documents/src/u3/urb
    loom: loaded 10MB
    time: ~2013.9.2..07.26.20..b510
    ames: on localhost, UDP 31337.
    http: live on 8080
    rest: checkpoint to event 965
    rest: old 0v16.5un6m, new 0v1i.il78t

    ---------------- playback complete----------------
    : /~waclux-tomwyc/try/4/bin/goodbye/hoon
    "hasta la vista, world."

Neighbor, tell me you've seen _that_ before.  Or with labels:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try/crazy/bin/goodbye "world"
    [waiting...]

Use ^X to get a prompt back while this task waits.  Then, create
the label:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :=/try/crazy/bin/goodbye "world"
    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :label %try %crazy
    = crazy /~waclux-tomwyc/try/5
    "hasta la vista, world."

What's going on here?  What's going on is that the Arvo
filesystem is an immutable, ie, referentially transparent,
namespace.  Since every path will only be bound to one file, when
we encounter a path that's not yet bound (but could be bound in
future), we do every OS's favorite thing - we _block_.

Civilization, a wise man once said, is the set of events you can
block on.  What's happening here is not in principle difficult at
all.  It is pretty hard to do, however, if your revision control
system is not in intimate proximity to your scheduler.

It would be difficult, we feel, to argue that this isn't cool.
But one could argue that it's just a party trick.  But once your
revision control system and your scheduler are jammed into one
phone booth... why not jam networking in there too?

#Network revision control#

Arvo is the OS.  Urbit is the network.  In theory you could write
an Urbit client that wasn't Arvo, though it's hard to see why.
But it seems unseemly to erase this distinction entirely.

So... let's do some networking.  Arvo is an immutable namespace.
But... Urbit is a _global_ immutable namespace.

We sent you two destroyers, right?  You could run them both from
the same pier (ie, from the same Unix process), but this would be
confusing for a newb.  So it's time to make a new window and boot
up your second ship.  Let's say it's `~wolnum-sorleb`:

    vere -c otherpier

And follow the same directions as above.  If it worked, you
should be able to say hi to yourself:

    ~wolnum-sorleb/try=> :hi ~waclux-tomwyc "welcome to Urbit"
    ; ~waclux-tomwyc is your neighbor
    ; ~waclux-tomwyc: "this is fun"

    ; ~wolnum-sorleb is your neighbor
    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :hi ~wolnum-sorleb "this is fun"
    ; ~wolnum-sorleb: "welcome to Urbit"

(Neighbors are Urbit ships that have completed a symmetric key
exchange.  In most cases they will also be communicating via
direct UDP packets, though if both sides are behind bad NAT
gateways the (encrypted) packets have to bounce through our
servers.)

Okay, that seemed to work.  Now we can use the global namespace
as if _the whole world was one giant computer_:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :cat /~wolnum-sorleb/try=/bin/goodbye/hoon
    [waiting...]
    |=  *
    |=  [planet=tape ~]
    :_  ~  :_  ~
    [%$ !>("hello, {planet}.")]

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :~wolnum-sorleb/try=/goodbye "world"
    [waiting...]
    "hello, world."

Whoa.

But perhaps that was a little slow.  The network isn't very well
tuned yet, and there are several roundtrips as we request config
files that aren't actually there for this trivial app.  

Moreover, if we try it again, it'll be slow again, because we are
requesting files at the current date with that `try=`.  Let's try
to use a label instead:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :~wolnum-sorleb/try/alpha/goodbye "world"
    [waiting...]

Hey, whoops.  That label doesn't exist yet.  So, our process will
block forever until it does.  Let's go over to the other side and
create it:

    ~wolnum-sorleb/try=> :label %try %alpha
    = alpha /~wolnum-sorleb/try/2

At which point you'll see

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :~wolnum-sorleb/try/alpha/goodbye "world"
    "hello, world."

Pretty cool, right?  Now try it again.  Since bindings are
permanent, it won't hit the network at all:

    ~waclux-tomwyc/try=> :~wolnum-sorleb/try/alpha/goodbye "world"
    "hello, world."

Let's try it with some data:

    ~waclyx-tomwyc/try=> (mul 10 ^:@/~wolnum-sorleb/try/beta/doc/fortytwo/noun)
    [waiting...]
 
    ~wolnum-sorleb/try=> :ram /===/doc/fortytwo/noun; (mul 6 7)
    + /~wolnum-sorleb/try/3/doc/fortytwo/noun
    ~wolnum-sorleb/try=> :label %try %beta
      
    ~waclyx-tomwyc/try=> (mul 10 ^:@/~wolnum-sorleb/try/beta/doc/fortytwo/noun)
    420

So not only can you use any data in Urbit, on the command line
or in a program, as if it were a constant - if the data isn't 
available yet, your task will block until it is.

Of course, a cynic would say, this is just a party trick too.
True enough!  But perhaps it'll get the party's attention.

Obviously, what's going on here is that a file request is just a
special case of a subscribe operation.  An attempt to use a
resource, local or remote, that isn't ready, is automatically
treated as a subscription to that resource, and creates state on
the server that owns it which will be activated once the resource
does exist.  (And if you kill the requesting task on the client,
yes, it will cancel the request on the server.)

It's the combination of a purely functional language and OS with
a secure, referentially transparent global namespace that makes
Urbit a qualitatively different programming experience.  APIs are
great and REST is an attempt to make the Web almost functional,
but at bottom a Web request remains a side effect in a mutable
system.  While Urbit requests are built on a message queue layer
which you can use if you like, simply sharing data (and/or code)
isn't a matter of APIs, requests, installs, etc.  You just use it.

It is of course possible to build the same kinds of services with
20th-century Web protocols.  Just as there are revision control
servers on the Internet, there are pretty good (certainly much
more featureful) publish-and-subscribe protocols over HTTP.  But
such protocols are standalone systems, and difficult to integrate
with each other in a single programming environment and service
layer.
