# u3: noun processing in C.

`u3` is the C library that makes Urbit work.  If it wasn't called
`u3`, it might be called `libnoun` - it's a library for making
and storing nouns.

What's a noun?  A noun is either a cell or an atom.  A cell is an
ordered pair of any two nouns.  An atom is an unsigned integer of
any size.

To the C programmer, this is not a terribly complicated data
structure, so why do you need a library for it?

One: nouns have a well-defined computation kernel, Nock, whose
spec fits on a page and gzips to 340 bytes.  But the only
arithmetic operation in Nock is increment.  So it's nontrivial
to compute both efficiently and correctly.

Two: `u3` is designed to support "permanent computing," ie, a
single-level store which is transparently checkpointed.  This
implies a specialized memory-management model.

Does `u3` depend on the higher levels of Urbit, Arvo and Hoon?
Yes and no.  It expects you to load something shaped like an Arvo
kernel, and use it as an event-processing function.  But you
don't need to use this feature if you don't want, and your kernel
can be anything you want.
 

## u3: l

The best way to introduce `u3` is with a simple map of the Urbit 
build directory - folding things we don't care about right now:
    
    g/                  u3 implementation
      g/a.c               allocation
      g/e.c               persistence
      g/h.c               hashtables
      g/i.c               noun construction
      g/j.c               jet control
      g/m.c               master state
      g/n.c               nock execution
      g/r.c               noun access, error returns
      g/t.c               tracing/profiling
      g/v.c               arvo kernel
      g/x.c               noun access, error crashes
      g/z.c               memoization/caching
    i/                  all includes
      i/v               Urbit systems headers
      i/g               u3 headers (matching filenames)
      i/c               c3 headers
        i/c/
    v/              Urbit systems code
      
    outside/        all external bundled code

# C3: C in the Urbit environment

Urbit has two distinct - but easily confused - contexts where 
we program in C.  Logically, Urbit is a pure noun processing
